[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> And at times, the color and
the light would be so intense.
And it was like
bubbling up in my head.
It was like this golden light.
It was just exploding.
And I had to put a lid on it.
It felt like if I had
laughed at that point
or if I even giggled,
I would have exploded.
>> I started to feel
this rising sensation.
And it started rising,
rising, rising, almost
like in the elevator feeling.
And then all of a sudden,
I could see this tiny hole.
And it was like my consciousness
was being drawn into that.
And all of a sudden, I
burst into the universe.
And everything was vibrating.
I knew I was vibrating.
And so I closed my eyes again.
And then it started
to happen again.
>> Kundalini is
spiritual energy,
the energy of consciousness,
which is thought to reside
at the base of the spine
of every human body.
And when aroused, it brings
new states of consciousness,
including mystical
illumination, exalted
powers, ecstasy, bliss,
clairvoyance, healing,
and transcendence of self.
Everything in the
universe is energy.
This source of energy,
when utilized properly,
can end suffering,
increase health,
bring blissful experiences,
loving relationships,
and spiritual and psychic gifts.
>> So we are just a microcosm
of that supreme energy.
>> There's a super intelligent
life energy everywhere,
of which we are all a part,
which acts in all of us.
It has an intelligence
or consciousness
that is beyond what at the
moment we can perceive.
>> Kundalini is the source of
power that the world's most
beloved artists,
composers, poets,
and writers may
have tapped into.
Many philosophers harnessed
this power within.
>> Many, many people
have had that experience,
myself as well, of this
living sense and experience
of the energy manifesting as
this scintillating blue light.
>> Changes, however,
are not always easy.
And as we undergo
this transformation,
we may experience much
phenomena unfamiliar to us.
Some of these are wonderful,
some can be terrifying.
Spontaneous awakening
of kundalini
can be dangerous due to
a lack of understanding.
And if the body is
not attuned to allow
the flow of this
supreme energetic force,
it can cause mental
and emotional imbalance
and physical discomfort.
Why is information
about kundalini
not spread to the
mainstream yet?
What is needed to recognize
this power within you?
This secret has been kept
hidden for centuries.
However, kundalini is
within every human,
a resource of energy
that when fully awakened,
allows us to reach our full
potential with joy, peace,
and unconditional love.
>> I had an injury
to my lower back.
The third vertebrae
was herniated.
Herniated disk, I should
say, during a ski accident
back in 1993.
And I had this hot flash
just right up my spine.
And it didn't result in any
hospitalization or anything
of that nature.
But I ended up having to go
to physical therapy for quite
some time.
And about three
weeks after that,
I started having an incredible
amount of emotional upheavals
starting within me.
And it started just basically
deconstructing my life.
I was just overcome by an
overwhelming sense of sadness.
Nothing meant anything anymore.
And I remained in that
state for probably
about two years,
during which time
I was seeing a psychiatrist,
who decided that medication was
the best route to take,
which didn't help anything,
and actually made things worse.
As soon as I impacted it,
just a pulse of energy,
it felt really incredibly hot.
It just raised up.
I didn't feel it enter
into my head or anything,
but it just raised up the
spine and then stopped.
And my back was hot
for days after that.
>> In 1975, I had a near-death
experience after 5 and 1/2
hours of spinal surgery and
waking up in a Stryker framed
circle bed.
About three days
after surgery, I
remember waking up and
having this huge belly.
My whole body had swelled up.
I had developed an ileus.
But people were
rushing in with carts,
with bottles, and
machinery, and tubes
and hooking me up to
all kinds of stuff.
And I remember I
was so terrified
that I just blanked out.
And the next thing I knew--
and I have to tell you
I was an atheist at this point.
I considered myself a very
sophisticated atheist.
[LAUGHTER]
Yeah.
I had been abused a lot as a
child, which had really just
turned me off, and I was numb.
And I woke up out
in the hallway.
And it was the
middle of the night.
And I looked up and down the
hall, and I didn't see anybody.
But I thought that
the lights were dim,
and there was nobody around
in the hospital hallway.
And I thought, well, if
they catch me out here,
I'm going to get into
trouble because I'm supposed
to be suspended in their bed.
So I turned around to
come back into the room.
And I was looking directly
into a PA speaker.
Now, I knew that PA speaker
was mounted on the ceiling.
So that's when I realized
something was wrong,
something was up.
And it was me.
I was up at the ceiling.
And I came back into the room.
And I looked down into the
circle bed, and I saw her.
She had tape wrapped
around her nose
to hold the tube down my
throat, and to my stomach.
And they had all
kinds of bags hanging.
And I looked at her, and
it certainly wasn't me.
The part of me that was
looking at her, that was me.
And I stayed like that
for a little while.
And I remember
thinking that this
was the first time in my life
I had felt peaceful, that I
felt calm and peaceful.
And as I connected
with that, I started
moving through
something very dark
that I couldn't call a
tunnel for years, not
until I became a researcher.
And I thought, yeah, I guess
tunnel is the best word for it.
But again, words can't really
explain the actual experience.
But I'm moving through
something that's very dark.
And I'm studying
what I'm seeing.
And I'm seeing light
turning in the darkness.
It's like the total darkness
was bringing light out of it,
or the light was coming
out of the darkness.
And it was moving ahead of me.
And as I was watching
this, I felt these arms
come around me, and
embrace me, and pull me
into this lush warmth.
And it was my grandmother.
I called her Bubbe.
My Bubbe had been
dead for 14 years.
And I had never once thought of
her existing beyond her death.
I mean, this was not
anything I believed.
But I knew I was with her.
And she held me.
And together, we
re-experienced the 19 years
we were together on this planet.
And I didn't just experience
it from my perceptions.
I experienced it from hers.
I could see everything
she was seeing.
I could feel everything
she was feeling.
And I had every
thought that she had.
So together, what
we were doing was
showing each other how much
love we had given each other.
It was incredible.
And it was my grandmother who
was giving me the attention
that I needed.
I wasn't getting
it from my parents.
And this went on until
we got to the point
where she had passed away.
And as I watched her dying, I
started moving away from her.
But it was OK that I was moving
away from her because I knew
that there were these
transmissions between us
with no words but
heart to heart.
I knew she'd always be
waiting for me in that tunnel.
And then I was back in
my body, back in the bed.
And I tried to tell some people
that came in on the health care
team that I left the bed.
I didn't tell them
what I just told
you, what took me a long
time to find words for it.
But I did tell them
I left the bed.
And they kept telling
me it was impossible,
that I couldn't leave the
bed, that I had hallucinated.
And the more I would protest,
the more they would sedate me.
>> Symptoms of out-of-body
experiences, or OBEs,
and kundalini are close first
cousins and may eventually lead
from one to the other.
In the OBE, a person
can learn that they are
more than their physical body.
They may learn of multiple
planes of existence
and of multiple expressions
of consciousness.
With kundalini, a person can
learn all of these things
and in addition,
the implications
of a conscious form
of physical divinity
residing inside an
unlimited yet physical body.
>> And a year after
the physical therapy,
I realized I couldn't go back
to being the way I was before.
I mean, we had a swimming pool.
We had an airplane.
We had everything imaginable
materialistically.
And it just was so
hollow for me now.
I loved my three kids, I still
did brownies and Cub Scouts.
But I couldn't go back
to the way I was before.
So what I did was I went back to
the hospital where I had been,
and I started working
in the emergency
room just as a volunteer.
But if people were brought in,
I would know if they were dying.
And I would just touch
them or hold their hands.
And when this would
happen, the staff
knew they didn't have to
send me to do anything else.
They wouldn't ask
me to run errands.
I'd be sitting
there for an hour,
holding somebody's
hand who was dying.
And that felt so good.
And that's when the kundalini
symptoms started happening.
I would get so
excited that I was
going to go into the hospital
to work, which started off being
one day, and then three days.
And then I realized I
had to go back to school.
But I would get so excited,
I would get a migraine.
And of course, they
couldn't find anything wrong
with my brain.
I had an EEG, all that stuff.
There was nothing.
But as soon as I would
get my hands on somebody
who was dying, I could feel my
headache draining down my arms.
And it would come
out through my palms.
Not pain anymore,
but a tingling.
>> Kundalini is a natural
part of being human.
It is an aspect
of the human being
that works like an electrical
capacitor to a small degree.
When a certain amount
of energy or a condition
warrants its release
into the body,
an extreme
transformation ensues.
Very powerful energy
that isn't electrical
will release into the body.
This can be triggered
by an accident
to the tailbone, or by extreme
meditation, or extreme prayer,
or by severe emotional duress.
It can also be activated
by practices intended
for its release or by a person
who has it already flowing
strongly within.
Kundalini is a Sanskrit
word meaning "coiled up."
There are many other names
for this energy from almost
every culture on Earth--
Greater Kan and Li
from China, Holy Fire
from the Christian mystics,
Lung of the Tibetans,
Tummo Fire of the
Buddhists, and Sufi latifahs
infused with zikr in Islam.
For thousands of years,
kundalini experiences
have been described in the
esoteric teachings of Hindus,
Egyptians, Tibetans, Chinese,
Native Americans, shamans,
the Bushmen of Africa.
The ancient Hindu
yoga practitioners
kept a concise and detailed
map of the symptomology
of kundalini.
>> And as soon as we come out of
the womb, we start being told--
you're my son, you're going to
be this; you're my daughter,
you're going to do that.
You're a girl, you can't
do this; you're a boy,
you better not do that.
Layer upon layer upon
layer of identity.
Layer upon layer that has
to be shed in order for us
to come back to knowing
what our real nature is.
And that's what kundalini does.
>> The science of yoga
describes, in a sense,
the cycle of a soul's
journey across many lifetimes
as having, in a sense,
two components of it.
One is called sovereignty.
It's the taking on of forms.
It's the soul that's just
looking for more experience,
pursue desires, all
these kinds of things.
And that builds more
karmas and more things
you have to do, and on,
and on, and on like that.
At some point, the soul goes,
this game is kind of tiresome.
There's just so much pleasure
to be had through the senses,
through relationships, through
consuming this or that.
I vaguely remember being a part
of something huge, and whole,
and complete, and full that
didn't require anything
to come in.
>> When we had a bit of a longer
meditation session is when I
had this experience.
And once I started
to meditate, then I
felt in the solar plexus area
a turning sensation and pain.
And at first, I thought, you
know, am I going to be ill?
Because that's the
only action, you
know, other than
normal digestion,
that I really ever had.
And I felt like I was kind
of rocking a little bit back
and forth.
And then all of a sudden, there
was this explosion of light,
inner light.
And with my eyes
closed, I could see over
my head what I perceived
as the Star of David.
Now, I wasn't from
the Jewish tradition.
And I was surprised, to be
honest with you, by that.
And at the same moment that
that light came up to my head
and I saw that star,
I heard the words
"All men are created equal."
And then, when I was walking
home at the end of the session,
I could see me coming toward me.
In other words, I
just saw myself.
Not necessarily
totally as I look,
but just brighter, with a
little bit of light interwoven
in the features, and so on.
I wasn't scared, it
didn't bother me.
I just thought to myself,
well, I've finally met myself.
>> And you know, in
eastern traditions,
kundalini is seen
as the goddess.
So it's a form of
the divine feminine.
>> According to Hindu
tradition, kundalini Shakti were
the divine feminine energy
who resides at the base
of the spine in
the first chakra,
slowly makes her ascent up
the spine when she has been
awakened.
Her role as divine energy is
to travel to the crown chakra
at the top of the head to
unite with her beloved Shiva,
the divine masculine energy
or pure consciousness,
who is inert until the
sacred circuit is completed.
Shakti's duty is to
purify the individual
in the soul body, physical
body, mental body,
psychological body,
emotional body
as she ascends, giving us
her blessings to evolve
to our maximum potential.
Kundalini nourishes the
Tree of Life within us
and is coiled up like a serpent.
And therefore, it is
called the "serpent power."
Christians called it a
reflection of the Holy Ghost.
The Old Testament symbol becomes
significant in Christianity
when Christ suggests
kundalini awakening.
"And as Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness,
even as the Son of
Man be lifted up,
that whosoever believeth
in Him should not
perish but have eternal life."
The caduceus held by
Roman god Mercury,
with one or two coiled serpents
entwined around the staff,
represents kundalini
which rises along
the central subtle channel
in a spiral movement.
The Lord Buddha spoke of the
middle path to achieve nirvana.
He was actually describing
the central channel, sushumna,
through which the kundalini
ascends from the root chakra
to the crown chakra.
In the Holy Quran,
prophet Muhammad Sahib
talked of the day
of resurrection,
when he says that the
"hands will speak."
When kundalini
awakening occurs, a flow
of energy in the form of cool
vibrations from the hands
is experienced, and
the various chakras
can be felt on parts of
the hands and fingers.
Shekinah, the radiance of
God, is the Hebrew concept
of kundalini Shakti.
It is a feminine Hebrew
word meaning the "dwelling"
or "settling" and is used to
denote the dwelling or settling
presence of God.
>> I dived pretty deep into
heavy drinking and drug use.
And that was more to
nullify the emotional pain.
It didn't make things better,
it made things much worse,
brought up a lot more
negativity within myself.
I think circumstances are being
developed behind the scenes
to move us apart.
You know, my life has
been incredibly hard.
And I want nothing more than
a connection with the divine.
And my current partner
doesn't agree that that's
what life is for, you know.
>> From there, my marriage
was falling apart.
My husband really wanted me to
go back to being the way I was.
And I mean, the way I was meant
I had to go back on Valium
to suppress who I was.
And I wasn't willing anymore.
My soul was coming out, and
I wasn't putting it back
in and pushing it down.
We started dating when
I was 14 and he was 17.
We were going
steady at 14 and 17.
And he wanted me to go back to
the way I was when I was 14.
And like I said, that
meant a lot of Valium.
I wanted to grow,
I wanted to change.
And change was the dirty word.
So we just went further, and
further, and further apart.
My parents could not
figure me out at all.
You know, they stood
way off in a distance
and looked at me like, who
is she, I don't know her.
I really couldn't find
any blood relatives
that I could commune
with anymore.
And that was very sad.
My friends, I have none of
the friends I had back then.
My husband still does,
they're still together.
And you know, this
didn't happen overnight.
It took me nine years
to say I need a divorce.
Because I kept trying,
and trying, and trying.
It's like I knew from
that experience the way
it's supposed to be.
And I just kept wanting--
I just kept trying to tell them
the way it's supposed to be.
And nobody wants to hear that.
They haven't had the
experience I've had.
They wanted to keep
going the way it is.
So yeah, it was really,
really, really distant.
That's why I went back
to school and became
a respiratory therapist.
Because then I could
work with dying people.
And when you're working
with dying people,
there is such honesty.
>> You have to die to the ego.
And ego dies in surrender.
It's not a literal death,
it's an absolute surrender.
So that the ordinary
ego mind that
seems to master, and control,
and boss us around, and drive
is to buy this, own that, have
this, go out with this person,
whatever--
we have to die to
that in a certain way.
>> People understand the
normal sequential development
of the soul.
And you can't short-circuit
this development sequence
because it won't work.
And that's reason
why some people go
through a partial awakening,
and then it goes away.
Or they'll go through
an awakening, and then
all of a sudden,
you see their ego
get real big as they start to
"look what experience I had."
>> That happens in so many
spiritual traditions and types
of transformative experience.
We finally let go of the ego.
And then we're
flooded with grace,
and total transformation
can occur.
>> The three steps are--
dependency, which is
when a child is born,
they have surrendered their
authority to the parent.
They are totally
dependent on the parent.
That then decreases,
and then the child
develops self-identity,
which I joke right in here
as the 16-year-old hired the
16-year-old while they still
know-it-all.
Then they have self-identity
or self-worship,
the "look who I am."
And they think they
are in control.
They are not dependent
on someone else.
Then is the next
transition phase,
which is the diminishing of
the ego or midlife crisis.
This is when bad
things start to happen.
And the ego says, wait a
minute, if I were in control,
bad things wouldn't happen.
And that is the beginning of
the diminishing of the self.
Now, as self diminishes,
as it comes down here,
this period right in
here, this transition,
would be the "dark
night of the soul."
The dark night of the soul
is when the self is empty.
And in Christianity,
that's when Paul
talked about the "dying daily."
In other words,
the self must die.
And the reason is because
if you're full of yourself,
you have no room for the divine.
So that just as
validation is what
helps a person build
their self-identity,
love is what helps a person
build their divine identity.
A soul must go
through this sequence.
Now, the reason that near-death
experiences accelerate
the process so much is
because it instantaneously
destroys the ego.
It creates an
instantaneous surrender.
So once you've gone through
that instantaneous surrender,
you can experience
God immediately.
>> Gopi Krishna, born in 1903
near Kashmir in northern India
was one of the first people
to popularize the concept
of kundalini among
Western readers.
He was a government
office clerk and practiced
prolonged meditations
for a number of years.
In 1937, at the age of 34,
while meditating one morning,
he experienced the sudden
and forceful awakening
of kundalini.
>> Well, he was meditating.
He had taken up the practice
of meditation in his own life.
And I think he was
doing it, as far
as I understand, without
the help of a guru,
on a regular basis.
He was extremely
dedicated to the practice.
He meditated
faithfully every day
for 17 years, including, as
he said, his wedding night.
So he knew his wife was going to
be very understanding and very
supportive.
>> One day in winter, about
the time of Christmas,
I was meditating
early in the morning,
when suddenly I found something
giving way in my brain,
as if a new aperture had opened.
And I felt energy rising
up from my spinal cord.
At first, I was terrified.
And my attention went to this
sensation caused by the energy.
The moment my sensation went
towards it, the vision ceased.
Then I again concentrated.
And ultimately, I managed
to keep my attention
at the crown of my head,
while the energy rose
upward and upward through the
spinal cord, through the neck,
and then into the brain.
And then I suddenly found
that a stream of silvery light
was pulling into my brain.
There was a sound like thunder
or like a waterfall in my ears.
And the noise grew louder,
and louder, and louder.
At the same time,
I began to expand.
I cannot describe to you
exactly what I mean by this.
But it seemed that my
consciousness was now gaining
a wider and wider space.
And I was leaving my body
behind and projecting myself,
spreading myself all
around in the universe.
>> He had a bit of a difficult
time for a number of years not
only assimilating the
experience as to what it meant,
but also the effect it had
on his body physically,
on his psyche
physically as well.
And in the course
of those years--
I believe it was about 12
years-- he meticulously
observed how the energy
was moving in his body,
and what happened to him also
in his daily life in terms
of spontaneous
creative abilities,
like the writing of
poetry and so on.
He came to the conclusion from
that that the experience he had
was parallel to or the same
as the experience of some
of the great mystics and
geniuses of the past.
And from that, he
put together the idea
that this kundalini
energy, if you will,
was the energy that's
driving evolution--
the evolution of
human consciousness
to the next stage, if you will.
Because it's an
evolutionary energy,
it's working in everyone.
And so people can have
spontaneous experiences
even if they don't have
a spiritual practice.
If they have a
spiritual practice,
they may have an experience
sooner rather than later.
Or in some cases, they
may not have it at all.
Gopi Krishna felt
that, again, there
was also a hereditary
component to this,
that somehow the body,
the nervous system
had to be in a
certain state of--
I'm just going to say the
certain state of health.
But not maybe health
as we understand it.
It had to be ready, I guess.
Or, if you will-- he used to use
the term-- it had to be "ripe"
for the experience.
Because there's, well, thousands
or hundreds of thousands
of people that meditate.
They're loving,
truthful, honest people
that don't necessarily
see that vision
or have a taste of that
mystical state that
is really the glory of
the kundalini experience.
>> Before his death in
1984, at the age of 81,
he wrote 17 books on
higher consciousness.
>> He started to write poetry
in languages he never spoke
or read.
Creative geniuses often say
that, well, you know, I just
saw it, it just came to me.
It was kind of
dropped in my lap.
And that's how Gopi Krishna
used to talk about it.
It was like this
information would
pass through his
interior field of vision.
And if he didn't write it
down somehow or dictate it
to somebody as it was
happening, that was it.
It was gone.
And usually it came
so fast, that he
couldn't get it all at once.
And so there were missing
words, or missing phrases,
or whatever.
And then he'd have to
think on it on his own
to see maybe the
pattern that was there
or whatever it is, and make
it fit and work it out.
He also started a
social organization
that was devoted to helping
the disadvantaged community,
especially with regard to
issues concerning the well-being
and rights of women.
>> The energy, when it moves
in you, starts to tune you up,
is maybe a good
way of putting it.
In some cases, the tuning
up can be rather rough.
In Gopi Krishna's case,
I guess because it
was a very strong experience,
and he had aggressively
done this meditation--
and I guess his
body really wasn't
totally prepared for it--
there was enough in
the heredity that
enabled him to eventually
get through the experience
without getting into some
real serious difficulties.
Oddly enough, he felt--
and he's written
it in many places--
that what saved him as he
went through this experience
and had the trials
and tribulations of it
was the charitable work he had
done in his life, which you can
also call he received grace.
That was the key at
the end of the day.
The meditation, well,
of course, it helped.
Because it helped to
open up the channel.
But if he hadn't done that
to help other human beings,
he really felt that maybe
he wouldn't have made it.
>> His main thrust over the
years was to write about
mystical experience and the
evolution of consciousness from
a scientific point of view.
Traveling extensively in
Europe and North America,
he dedicated his
life to promoting
the scientific
study of kundalini
and developing the
kundalini hypothesis.
>> He wanted science to
investigate it for a couple
of reasons.
Number one was that
the world as it is
and the way we
are at the moment,
if it sort of gets
a stamp of approval
that it's
scientifically approved,
or there's been research done,
or it's been investigated,
then there's something to it.
Of course, you know, the
experience for the individual
is subjective.
There are some similarities
between experiences,
some changes that may
happen to the individuals.
Some of these changes can
be perceived over time.
But it's not like you can
put it in a little package
and say, there it
is, this is it,
touch it, put your finger on it.
You feel it, but if
somebody else hasn't
had that experience, and
they don't feel it's valid,
it's very difficult
to share it with them.
You know, it's been,
of course, known
as indescribable or ineffable.
So he wanted science to
investigate it for that,
in the sense that if there
was an investigation,
it would also get
a lot of publicity.
Then people might also become
interested in learning about it
even beforehand.
And then if they had a
spontaneous experience,
it may save them, you know,
some of the difficulties.
>> Isaac Newton and Albert
Einstein are among the many
eminent scientists who have had
an interest in and appreciation
for religious and esoteric
thought and experience.
In Newton's case,
he wrote extensively
on the subject of alchemy, and
in the early 1690s, apparently
devoted more time to alchemy
than all his other pursuits.
Einstein expressed
his appreciation
by proclaiming, "I maintain
that cosmic religious feeling is
the strongest and
noblest incitement
to scientific research."
He further explains that "the
scientist's religious feeling
takes the form of a
rapturous amazement
at the harmony of
natural law, which
reveals an intelligence
of such superiority
that, compared with it,
all the systematic thinking
and acting of human beings
is an utterly insignificant
reflection."
>> I once asked Gopi Krishna
how long did he think we
as a species would
inhabit the Earth.
His mind-boggling reply
was that human beings
would continue to live on
this planet for about 4
million years longer.
During this unimaginable
length of time,
we will, of course, colonize
other planets, he said.
But our species will dwell
on Earth for about as long
as our Sun continues to shine,
which, by some estimates,
is about four
million years more.
If that's the case,
I asked, why then
are you so keen on launching
the scientific investigation
of kundalini now?
Because, he said, it is the
safest and most effective
way to rid the world of
the overhanging threat
of a nuclear war.
To my way of
thinking, that is what
distinguishes an illuminated
yogi from an ordinary person.
He or she becomes a spiritual
genius and a prophet
able to see into the
future, both near and far.
And because of the spiritual
genius or illuminated genius
can see into the future,
such men and women
are essential for our
survival in the atomic age.
>> Another part to it is, I
believe he was sure in himself
that this investigation would
bring out some surprises
for the scientific community
in terms of what their theories
are about consciousness, about
the mind, about the brain,
and about the evolution
of consciousness.
And that's how science has
advanced usually that there's
a contradiction somewhere.
Whatever the theory
is they have,
they come to a bit
of a roadblock,
and they can't explain that.
So he was convinced of that.
And a good example of that, in
the last 10 or 15 years anyway,
is the concept of
neuroplasticity,
where the neurons in the brain
can make different connections
and can lead to changes
in how the brain functions
in the individual.
25 years ago, science believed,
well, the brain, that was it.
It was fixed for life,
and that's all you got.
So there's a good example
right there, that's current.
>> And there hasn't been
a scientific investigation
into the phenomenon
of kundalini.
Nor has there been any
meaningful research
into consciousness.
Why not?
Because it is not possible
to understand consciousness
without first
investigating and coming
to know something more about
the phenomenon of kundalini.
At present, we have only Gopi
Krishna's inner explorations
to go by.
But his observations cannot
be accepted by science until
and unless they are
verified by experimentation.
And for this kind of research
to be taken up by science,
Gopi Krishna's theories need to
be widely discussed and debated
first.
For example, if a certain
practice of meditation
were to culminate in the
production of an Einstein
or a Plato right before the
eyes of leading scientists,
they would readily acknowledge
the efficacy of the discipline.
And then there would be
thousands of emulators,
all fired up with
the hope of attaining
to the same extraordinary
state of cosmic consciousness.
Then all the
resources of science
would be mobilized to
gain more and more insight
into this state.
This concept would put
a different complection
on religion also.
It would have to concede that
the whole race is evolving
in the same direction--
the direction followed by
the great sages and prophets
of the past--
and that it has to
achieve the same goal.
It also has to be admitted then
that what we call miraculous,
or supernatural, or
paranormal phenomena
might be the
outcome of laws that
rule the spiritual world or
the forces compounding it,
of which we have no real
awareness at present.
>> People don't realize
that just as the anatomy
and physiology of the physical
body is the same no matter what
your religion, the anatomy
and physiology of the soul is
the same no matter
what your religion.
So if you were to
compare, for example,
Saint Teresa of
Avila's Interior Castle
and her Christian writings
from the 15th century
about her kundalini
awakening, if you
were to put that side by
side with Gopi Krishna's
description of his
kundalini awakening,
they are both saying
the same thing.
And that's what's really
neat, because no matter what
your religion is, it
is the same thing.
>> It all came out of
the study of yogis,
and advanced meditators, and
meditators that had abilities
and capacities to change
how their body, their mind,
their brain worked in ways that
conventional Western medicine
said was impossible.
And the methods and techniques
that are employed in yoga
were originally discovered
through the actions
of awaken kundalini.
What we think of yoga
postures in the West,
the Hatha yoga asanas,
they were first observed
and continue to be
observed in people
who have awakened kundalini.
They may go through some
of these postures quite
spontaneously.
Well, we're already studying
the Hatha yoga and other things
related to breathwork
and mindfulness
that have very good
health benefits
and that are very important
for all of society in terms
of changing cardiovascular
health, decreasing stress,
stress that exacerbates all
kinds of medical conditions.
So it would be a
very fruitful way
of being able to pursue what
of the many kundalini-related
techniques in science from the
ancient sages of the Eastern
tradition would have
medical benefits today.
We're in the earliest stages
of infancy of the research.
Because research
takes money, and money
goes after legitimate problems.
There's not enough belief or
understanding about kundalini.
So I think there's a lot
of intermediary steps
that are being built.
Because there is money
that's getting funded,
research being funded--
for instance,
mindfulness-based relaxation,
kinds of stress management
exercises, meditation.
There is meditation
research being done.
There's certain forms of yoga
starting to be researched.
The crunch in health dollars
makes it very important
that we discover ways
to support wellness.
It's much more cost effective
to support a person's wellness
than to try and treat
a chronic condition.
So it's going to be more
effective to try and do
research and show that
a yoga lifestyle is
going to be healthier.
When you look at a country,
for instance, China,
that has such a huge
population, and yet, you'll
see in every city,
people doing things
like Tai Chi in the morning--
hundreds and hundreds of
people, thousands of people,
millions of people
across the country.
And that's been promoted.
We need to have that
kind of philosophy.
We need to have in
the West the idea
of what do we do to
promote optimal health,
optimal well-being.
And yoga kinds of practices
can really support that.
They have a tremendous
amount to give in that way.
That will be building
bridges towards then
being able to do research
on sort of the more
esoteric levels of yoga, things
related to kundalini and energy
in that.
>> People will follow
society's rules not out of fear
of consequences and legalism,
but out of love for mankind.
Same rules, not
one dot is removed,
but you follow them out of love.
And the reason is because
as consciousness grows--
if you were to be able to
see an individual soul,
an individual soul is about--
the average, some are greater--
the average is about 15 feet
out from the physical body
or about 30 feet in diameter.
That's at its smallest.
As consciousness
raises, it expands,
and it gets greater and greater.
So you have all these people
whose consciousness is focused
down here, at the lower level.
Think of a V, and their
consciousness is at the bottom.
They view everyone else
as separate from them,
and life is a competition.
But as your
consciousness raises up,
you start to realize
these Vs overlap.
And you start to realize
that that other person's
consciousness is within yours.
So you start to
develop some altruism.
And as you get to a higher
level of consciousness,
you realize that
everyone exists within
the same unified consciousness.
So if I cause harm to you,
I'm causing harm to myself.
>> Well, I would expect that
there's going to be more
of individuals being seen as
having these kinds of symptoms
looking beyond the
psychopathology that is often
these things are characterized
as and looking for some help
and saying, wait a minute, this
has to do with transcendent
states.
We need to have the kind
of psychology-- and we do,
in terms of like
transpersonal psychology--
that says, these kinds of
states aren't pathological,
these are enlightened states.
These are optimal states,
these are transcendent states.
People need to learn how to
integrate those so that they
don't become dysfunctional.
But it's a sign that
that's a possibility.
And how do we develop the kinds
of treatment paradigms, places
that help people integrate
these experiences?
>> The thing to be
aware of, though,
is that in this
process right here,
where this person could go back
here, there is a process that,
for a person going through it,
it's very difficult for them
to identify it.
And it's what I call the
false kundalini process
or the false born-again.
It's a fairly easy process,
if I were ruthless and wanted
to control people, to
lead them through it.
What it is, it's a
mind control technique.
It's really simple.
It's done quite often in
charismatic churches, where
you step one, allow the
volume of your voice
to go up and down; step two,
tell a sad story, happy story,
knock a person's emotional
consciousness off balance;
step three, induce guilt,
fear, anger; step 4,
offer them a way
to get rid of that.
They will swear on a
Bible they are born-again.
It has absolutely nothing
to do with religion.
It is a mind control game.
It's actually a stage
hypnosis induction technique.
This also applies to
the kundalini process.
It's totally false.
And where it is
so dangerous is--
the pitfall is that
instead of you surrendering
to the divine, which is what
takes a person up this slope,
this person surrenders their
authority to another human
being.
This is true on an individual
basis on the spiritual path.
It's also true on a
greater basis in society.
For example, the
Germans, the Prussians
were very proud people prior to
World War I. They were up here.
But they lost the war
that put them down here.
At the same time, there was
the flu epidemic of 1918.
At the same time,
there was famine.
So the people were
in a terrible place.
If you look at Abraham
Maslow's hierarchy of needs,
it was the base layer
that they were looking
for-- food, shelter, security.
Security-- things
that give comfort.
So what ended up happening,
they looked for someone
to surrender their authority to.
And that set the stage
for the leader that
led them into World War II.
Or 2000 years ago, the Jews
were a very proud society.
But they were defeated
by the Romans.
They were down here.
They were looking
for a King, someone
to surrender their authority to.
And along came this guy.
And they tried to
make him their King.
And he said, no, no,
no, but I will teach you
how to get from here to here.
Right there is what the
New Testament is about.
If I must brag, let
me brag of my faults.
The humbled, the meek
shall inherit the Kingdom.
In other words,
diminish the self.
You know, the dark night of the
soul, which is right in here.
And what is the most
important commandment?
Love, which is what
brings you up here.
>> The true language
of love is silence.
Family, friends, employers,
country, state, and city--
all of your life can be
continued and expressed
within the parameters of
walking a higher path.
Much of this path will be unique
to you and your circumstances
in life.
You will be given what
you need to flourish.
Your job is to surrender
to the surprising gifts
and experiences that will
typically come your way.
You'll need to source yourself
and make your own decision.
>> Basically, what we all have
to do is understand and realize
that the mystics that came in
the past and the advice they
gave, which is passed
down, basically,
in the religious scriptures
about the mode of life that we
lead, is key.
There's obviously diet, general
physical health, and so on.
But the mental
health of the person,
in the sense of
how we think, how
we behave to develop compassion,
understanding, and love,
is the key for a healthy process
and a healthy human race.
>> Everyone should stop
and ask themselves,
why am I doing what I'm doing?
What's my purpose?
What's the meaning of
what I'm chasing in life?
Whether it be my
identity as a parent
with a dozen of
children, whether it
be a pile of wealth
or pension funds,
what is the purpose
of what I am doing?
And what is my purpose
for being here?
Because by asking
the right questions,
the answers will come to you.
>> Every one of us has
to build a better person.
That's how the world is going
to, in my mind, survive.
You can't legislate it,
you can't do it by force.
It has to bloom.
And it will bloom.
Kundalini is also considered to
be the guardian of evolution.
So a higher consciousness
or cosmic consciousness
isn't just an experience
for a short period of time.
At the end of the
day, we're supposedly
going to live in it like we live
now, except with that glory,
and that love, and that
awe, and the perception
that generally we don't
have at the moment
>> I worked as an estate planner
for years with very wealthy
people.
And the first
question I asked them
was, how much are you worth
three minutes after you're
dead?
What good is your wealth
is what I'm saying.
It's a tool.
It is not your mission.
>> So the intellect is there
to help us develop a lifestyle
where we can take advantage
of it and develop ourselves
spiritually.
But what's happening
in general is we're not
spending that time that way.
We're either working
harder to make more money,
or we're kind of just goofing
around doing something.
And that's OK.
We should have fun.
Life is supposed to be fun.
It's supposed to be joyful.
But we have to have a balance.
>> If people will pursue
their highest nature,
that is the way to pursue
the unfolding of kundalini.
Pursue your highest
nature as a loving,
compassionate generous,
kind human being.
Pursue your ability
to serve others
with that kind of attitude.
And you will be fully pursuing
the Holy Spirit, the kundalini,
however you want to call it.
And it will become alive
and present in you.
>> You have mysticism on one
side, if you will, or religion.
And you have empirical
science on the other.
And they meet a little bit.
But there's things that one
can do for the other and vice
versa.
And that I think we need to
focus on a little bit more
in this time.
Technology can give us
the time to meditate.
You know, we don't have to
be afraid of being attacked
by wild animals all the time.
We have conveniences,
so that we're not
spending all day long
doing hard physical labor
and then exhausted at the end.
So it's something that
Gopi Krishna pointed out.
That's why we've been
provided with those advances.
>> People need to find
their own answers though.
Not "here's my answer, this
fits universally for everyone."
It has to be their purpose,
not what I tell them
their purpose should be.
Eventually, everyone will
find the same purpose.
But there's many steps
to get to that place.
>> We're not going to pass
enough laws to make people do
something that they
don't want to do.
And that is the other reason
why Gopi Krishna wanted science
to investigate it.
Of course, he was
confident that they
would validate the process in
some way, or they would find--
something would
be different that
would change people's ideas.
And that once that
happened, people
would realize that having this
experience even for 10 seconds
is more than all the
money in the world.
It means nothing.
And that's why historically,
well, Buddha was a King, right?
He just threw it, gave it
away, left it, didn't need it.
There are stories in the
newspaper now of millionaires,
multimillionaires just
donating their money away
because their life is empty.
It's empty because this
component is missing from it.
And so I would wish everyone
that there would be stadiums
where-- you know how people
go to a sporting event
now to watch?
Well, instead of watching
a sporting event,
you'd be able to see
somebody have this experience
and have the joy from it.
And that joy, to a
certain degree, of course,
would spread.
And then people would realize,
well, gee, maybe I can do it.
The downside is,
there's no shortcuts,
and there's no guarantee.
But still, it's
certainly worth, to me.
It's going to make the world
a better place irregardless.
>> We are co-creating our life
with an energy that is so much
wiser than we are.
We've let go of control.
We're not trying to
control our life anymore.
This energy is
moving through life.
And I really feel
like my journey
has been a constant learning
how to let go and let
this energy guide me
to become who I am now.
What I found was that I
was capable of writing.
I never knew I was a writer.
I started writing
about all this.
And I was getting published
in nursing journals
and respiratory therapy journals
while I was still a student.
I wound up going to Connecticut
and learning all about
psychiatric research.
And I was able to interview
near-death experiences
for six years about kundalini.
And that's been my life.
And then I met my now husband.
So everything unfolded.
I was terrified when
I left, I really was.
But I knew I had to do it.
I had to save my soul.
We have a wonderful
relationship now.
And I have a wonderful
relationship with my kids.
And I have a wonderful husband.
So yeah, there were
some scary years there.
But boy, is it
all been worth it.
I'd do it all over again.
>> I found a way to open up
to this energy and develop it
in a safe way.
It's been from dawn to midnight
of constant spiritual work.
It's energy work.
Ultimately, and maybe
this is my ego talking,
but enlightenment is the
goal of this Earth plane.
And that's where I want to be.
I may not get here
this lifetime.
But as far as I
can get is my goal.
So if she comes
knocking, open the door.
>> Divinity has no limitations
inside of the material
universe.
It's abundance is
without measure.
And it is into this abundance
of love, joy, opportunity,
and creation that
we travel as it
is opened to us when
we take our first steps
off the threshold of light.
Kundalini forms the bridge
that one walks to and from
in living a life that is
exalted and earthbound
at the same time.
It is very important to come
into our divine expression
and acceptance of kundalini from
the aspect of our core self--
yes, the actual
you that you are,
the essence of your personhood.
This would include the
validation of the you
that you are, the
sex, the looks, all
of the descriptors of you.
And from this honest
understanding,
we take into account
the brutalities of life
that have been experienced.
We accept and
realize the lessons
of these incursions
and sculptings
into and of our soul.
And we move into
the understanding
that we are still who we are.
We are still that divine
truth made manifest
on this and in the many worlds.
What have you adopted
and internalized
as part of a coping strategy?
How have you been forced
into a mold that is not you?
Where are you?
[MUSIC PLAYING]